---
title: Rotasız Gezgin Koyu
date: 2024-07-25
cover: 20240725_191733.jpg
tags: ["spot"]
last_visit: 2025-05-03
---

Rotasız Gezgin Koyu (English translation: Routeless Traveler Bay), located in
Sarıyer/İstanbul, is a remote bay located at the very north-east of the European
Side. It has 2 hills beside the hill.

I sometimes go here to chill out, after work. You can bring your own camping
chair or sit on a rock to enjoy the view. There are also some small places to
camp. But beware that there are strong winds coming from the Black Sea
sometimes.

![Panoramic picture of the camping spaces](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/20240801_200643.jpg)

## First Hill

There are two possible entries to the first part of hills and they are ending
with two different places, which are not connected. Each of the entries are
quite narrow. Be careful not to get yourself scratched by the bushes!

![One of the entrances](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/250105-rotasiz_gezgin_koyu_entrance.gif)

Sunset is not as spectacular as it should be: Other hill blocks the view. I got
a feeling that sunrise should be better, though. Because east side has a more
clear view. But never been there early in the morning so it's only my
assumption.

![Sunset at the bay](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/20240801_200802.jpg)

![East side of the bay](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/20240725_193257.jpg)

First entry hosts the smaller part. Once you pass the narrow path, nice green
view will welcome you. This part also has a small beach but sand is quite rough,
though. I sometimes see people swimming in that beach and doing high dives from
rocks inside the sea.

![Welcoming view](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/20240725_191733.jpg)

![The beach](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/20240725_193822.jpg)

![Some of the rocks to do a high dive](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/20240725_193031.jpg)

Second part is much more bigger and higher than the sea level. It is not very
possible to swim here. But I like this part more because the view is better.
There are couple of cliffs which have totally different views. But please be
careful when navigating around them because terrain can be quite soft and it can
cause catastrophic results.

![View from a cliff](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/20240725_192340.jpg)

![There are rocks to sit on and enjoy the view](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/20240801_200117.jpg)

## Second Hill

Second hill is much more bigger than the first. Entrance was way more easier
also. It has bigger rocks and bigger green areas.

![One of the big green areas](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/DSCF4154.JPG)

Rock formations are gorgeous in this place. Colors are great, blends nicely with
the sea and grows little nice flowers.

![Birds resting on these rocks](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/rotasiz_gezgin_koyu_birds.gif)

![Little flower growing on rocks](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/DSCF4145.JPG)

It gets better, though. I saw another little bay between these rocks. It had
vegetation inside the water and it was looking awesome.

![Vegetation inside the water](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/rotasiz_gezgin_koyu_wave.gif)

The thing I didn't notice about this when I was there was that it also habitats
some fishes.

![Fishes swimming in these beautiful blue water](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/DSCF4128.JPG)

## Where Is It

It is located in Sarıyer/İstanbul Turkey. It is inside the Rumelifeneri Village.
If you follow coast side road to the west, you can see entries located at your
right. They are quite hidden but you can see other people park their vehicles
at the side of the road, in front of both entries. Note that if you see a beach
while following that road: You missed the entries, turn back. Or enjoy yourself
in that beach, your choice.

Exact coordinates are 41.238938396992964, 29.103902008727104 and Google maps
link is
[maps.app.goo.gl/xDqb7HtJQ7Aidqdv8](https://maps.app.goo.gl/xDqb7HtJQ7Aidqdv8).

There are some public busses that goes to Rumelifeneri Village and the village
is the last stop. After that, 10 minute walk is needed. So, it is possible to go
there without having a vehicle. If you happened the follow the shoreline (it's
cliffs, actually), there are similar views that you can enjoy. These spots are
crowded though.

But I suggest going there with your own vehicle at your own pace and listening a
relaxed music at the background. Because roads are twisted and has a good view;
It is quite peaceful to drive slowly. Be cautious, if you ride a motorcycle
though: There are stray dogs near the village. Dogs like to hide in blind spots
and chase you when you pass them. Either pass them extremely slow (they will
stop chasing you) or hold your legs upwards and throttle pass them; They
probably won't attack you.

![Road to Rumelifeneri Village](/posts/travel-logs/rotasiz-gezgin-koyu/250105-rotasiz_gezgin_koyu_road.gif)
